All sampling methods used to collect this data are consistent with the standard operating procedures developed by the IEP Tidal Wetlands Monitoring Project Workteam. The SOPs are available online:   http://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=160451 . For more detailed information on project background, sampling design, and analysis, see FRP annual reports: 
Contreras, D., R. Hartman, S. Sherman, A. Furler, and A. Low. 2016. Pilot study phase I: Results from 2015 gear methodology trials in the North Delta. California Department of FIsh and Wildlife, Fish Restoration Program, Stockton, CA.

Contreras, D., R. Hartman, and S. Sherman. 2017. Pilot Study Phase II: Results from 2016 gear evaluation in the North Delta. California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Fish Restoration Program, Stockton, CA. http://www.water.ca.gov/environmentalservices/docs/frpa/pilot_phase_II_report_FINAL_3MAY2017.pdf.
Contreras, D., R. Hartman, and S. Sherman. 2018. Sampling fish and invertebrate resources in tidal wetlands of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta: Report on Phase III Pilot Monitoring, 2017. California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Stockton, CA.

Environmental Parameters:
Water quality (pH, DO, temperature, conductivity, and turbidity) was collected for each fish or invertebrate sample using a YSI 6600 or YSI Proplus and portable turbidity meter. Other environmental observations, including tidal stage, water depth, weather, wind speed, and habitat type were also collected (see Environmental Data table for gear specifications).


FISH
FRP sampled fish in shallow water habitat near planned tidal wetland projects. Sampling occurred concurrently with the UC Davis Arc Survey and US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) Liberty Island Survey in 2015-2016. Sampling occurred concurrently with mid-channel sampling by the IEP Summer Townet (STN) and Fall Midwater Trawl (FMWT) surveys, June-December, 2017. Based on the STN and FMWT sampling schedule, sites were surveyed twice a month from June-August and once a month from September-December. Sampling sites were typically void of vegetation and composed of sand and mud substrate mixtures. 
In 2015 and 2016, lampara nets were deployed concurrently with USFWS and UC Davis once per month. In 2017, Beach seines and lampara nets were deployed concurrently with the STN during the summer (June-August) and with FMWT during the fall (September-December). 

Before sampling began, the crew scouted all the tidal wetland restoration locations for areas where a beach seine could be deployed. These recurring sites were recorded as waypoints and repeatedly sampled throughout the study. In addition, two lampara sites were fixed in a side channel off Miner Slough because this will be the location of the southern breach of Prospect Island when it is restored as a tidal wetland. All other lampara sampling sites were randomly selected using the sampling design tool in ArcMap (ESRI Inc. Redlands, CA). 

Beach Seine: The beach seine is a shallow water gear type that is deployed from shore by crewmembers. It measures 15 m long x 1.2 m high and is composed of 3.2 mm delta square mesh. One crewmember walked perpendicular from shore into the water holding one end of the net until a depth appropriate for proper seining was reached. A second crewmember followed the path of the first crewmember to minimize site disturbance and positioned their seine pole upon reaching the first crewmember. The first crewmember then turned parallel with the shore and continued walking until the seine was fully opened. Water depth and seine lengths were recorded before both crewmembers pulled the seine towards the beach at a similar speed until only the cod end bag remained in the water. The crew filled a tub with water and placed the cod end in the tub along with any fish caught in the wings of the seine. 

Lampara Net: The lampara net is a tapered net measuring 36.5 m long x 3.7 m high. The cod end is composed of 9.5 mm stretch mesh and connects to two wings composed of variable stretched mesh (69.9, 146.1, and 88.9 mm). This net was deployed in shallow and channel habitat from a boat where the tip of the wing was tossed into the water attached to a buoy and sea anchor. Crewmembers deployed the net from the bow of the boat as the boat moved in a circular fashion back to the buoy and sea anchor. One crewmember then brought the buoy and sea anchor onboard and hooked both ends of the net onto the front cleat. The boat then went backwards and caused the net to impinge on itself to prevent fish from escaping through the bottom of the net. Once the net was "folded in half", each crewmember grabbed one side of the net and brought it onboard. Once the cod end was reached, it was placed in a tub filled with water. 

Fish Processing: All fish in the sample are identified to species. Fish length is measured to the nearest mm (fork or total length, as applicable), for the first 30 individuals of each species. All additional individuals are counted, but not measured.

Invertebrates:
We sampled at restoration sites, existing wetlands, and adjacent open-water areas across the Delta and Suisun Marsh to incorporate varying salinity and surrounding land use. We sampled most sites intensely during a single spring sampling event in late March and early April, 2017 (4-10 samples per habitat type, depending on wetland size), with less intense sampling monthly March-June, 2017.
FRP Zooplankton Nets: The macrozooplankton net (or "mysid net") is a 0.4 m x 0.4 m mouth (500 microns mesh size) net that was attached to a steel sled and pulled obliquely through the water column for five minutes. Mesozooplankton were sampled with a 14.6 cm diameter (150 microns mesh size) zooplankton net attached to the macrozooplankton net frame (similar to EMP methods, Hennessy 2009). A flowmeter was mounted in each net to measure sample volume. If the tidal channels or accessible near-shore habitat were too short to take a full five-minute tow, the tow time was reduced. In some cases, gear was held in the mouth of a tidal channel to sample water flowing out of the channel on an ebb tide instead of being trawled. After retrieval, the nets were rinsed from the outside to wash down the sample into the cod end.  All content collected in a cod end was preserved in 70% ethanol for later identification. 

Vegetated habitats:  We used a 25 cm x 30 cm d-frame net with 500 microns mesh for all sweep net samples. We haphazardly choose 4-10 sampling locations per site and conducted sweep nets in vegetation types roughly proportional to their coverage of the site. We adapted the sweep net technique slightly for different habitat types. 
Emergent Aquatic Vegetation (EAV): Five 1 m sweeps, scraping the vegetation as much as possible to knock invertebrates off the stems. All samples were taken within 1 m of the edge, since vegetation was less dense and easier to sample. This is also the area where salmonids have been shown to forage most effectively (Simenstad and Cordell 2000). Samples were taken in whichever species was dominant at the site, usually Schoenoplectus acutus, Schoenoplectus californicus, or Phragmites australis.

Submerged Aquatic Vegetation (SAV): Five 1 m sweeps through the thickest growth, collecting vegetation remaining within the frame of the net at the end of the sweep. In the laboratory, vegetation was dried to a constant weight. Samples were taken in whichever species of vegetation was dominant, most frequently Egeria densa, with some samples in Ceratophyllum demersum and Stuckenia pectinata.

Floating Aquatic Vegetation (FAV): The net was lifted from beneath a clump of FAV. Plant material outside of the net frame, and any leaves above the surface of the water, were severed from the sample with shears (similar to Donley Marineau et al. 2017). In the laboratory, the roots were dried to a constant weight. Samples were taken in whichever species of FAV was dominant, most frequently Eichhornia crassipes, with some samples in Ludwigia spp. and Azolla spp.

EAV sample catch per unit efforts (CPUE) were calculated as number of invertebrates per sample (five sweeps). CPUEs for SAV and FAV samples were calculated as number of invertebrates per gram of dried vegetation.

Our open water sampling patches were haphazardly distributed across all unvegetated open water and channels > 1.5 m across. We combined open-water sampling with fish sampling where possible to reduce disturbance and increase efficiency. Methods used in open-water have a long history of use in monitoring in the Delta, and allowed us to compare our measurements in vegetated wetlands to conditions in channels and make comparisons to long-term data sets. Methods included: zooplankton tow, mysid (macrozooplankton) tow, neuston tow, and benthic cores/ponar grabs. 

Zooplankton and Mysid tows: The macrozooplankton net (or “mysid net”) is a 0.4 m x 0.4 m mouth (500 micron mesh size) net that was attached to a steel sled and pulled obliquely through the water column for five minutes. Mesozooplankton were sampled with a 14.6 cm diameter (150 micron mesh size) zooplankton net attached to the macrozooplankton net frame (similar to EMP methods, Hennessy 2009). A flowmeter was mounted in each net to measure sample volume, and effort was standardized by catch per cubic meter of water sampled. If the tidal channels or accessible near-shore habitat were too short to take a full five-minute tow, the tow time was reduced. In some cases, gear was held in the mouth of a tidal channel to sample water flowing out of the channel on an ebb tide instead of being trawled.
After retrieval, the nets were rinsed from the outside to wash down the sample into the cod end.  All content collected in a cod end was preserved in 70% ethanol for later identification. 


Benthic core: Benthic cores have been used extensively to quantify chironomid and amphipod populations, as well as bivalves and other infauna in tidal wetlands (Howe et al. 2014; Wells 2015). We had some difficulty predicting appropriate tidal stage for sampling at some of the sites, so sample size was small and unbalanced. Sampling during the 2018 work plan was more evenly distributed.
In shallow water (< 1.5 m), we took a 4 in (20 cm) diameter benthic core, hand-deployed to a depth of 20 cm. In deep water > 1.5 m, we used a 9 x 9 in ponar grab modified for use in hard substrates (as per USFWS Liberty Island Monitoring, L. Smith pers. comm), with three samples at each site. The core was washed and sieved on board the boat to remove the sand/mud and preserve any organic detritus and invertebrates. Two crew members estimated % silt, sand, and gravel in the field, and averaged the values. Effort was calculated as catch per surface area of substrate sampled. 
Neuston tow: Emerging insects and Collembola found at the surface of the water are an important feature in salmonid diets, and are commonly sampled using neuston tows and drift nets (Sommer et al. 2001, Howe et al. 2014). The neuston net is a 45 cm x 30 cm rectangular net, 1 m long with 500 _m mesh towed half-way out of the water to sample invertebrates on the surface of the water. We towed the neuston net at the surface of the water from the side of the boat via a boat-hook. In narrow channels, we pulled the net along the edge of emergent vegetation by hand (as in Howe et al. 2014).  We standardized effort by the distance of the tow calculated by GPS track multiplied by width of net to calculate surface area of water sampled. After retrieval, all content collected in a cod end was preserved in 70% ethanol for later ID.

Invertebrate Processing:
Macroinvertebrate samples: All samples were sorted to extract invertebrates from plant material and detritus, and invertebrates were identified by a Senior Laboratory Assistant (SLA) or Scientific Aide. A subset of samples had identifications checked by an Environmental Scientist for quality assurance. Another subset of samples were checked by an outside lab (Wayne Fields of Hydrobiology), for external quality assurance.
Subsampling: Approximately 400 invertebrates from each sample were identified. If more than 400 invertebrates were present in a sample, or more than four hours are required for processing, they were quantitatively sub-sampled using a grid tray.  
Taxonomic effort: Invertebrates were identified to taxonomic levels corresponding to their importance in fish diets. In the macroinvertebrate samples, mysids, isopods and amphipods were identified to Genus; insects were identified to Family. 
Mesozooplankton (Copepoda, Cladocera, and Rotifera) occurring incidentally in the mysid net were enumerated during sorting, but data on these taxa were removed during analysis because they are more accurately quantified using the zooplankton net
Zooplankton: All samples were filtered and washed in a 150 _m mesh sieve. Filtered zooplankton samples were diluted to a set volume depending on the concentration of zooplankton and/or detritus. 1 mL subsamples were placed on a Sedgewick-Rafter cell glass slide. At least 5 slides, but no more than 20 slides were processed for each sample, targeting 6% of the total sample. Subsamples were extrapolated to calculate the total number of organisms in the sample in individuals per cubic meter. 
All samples were processed by a trained Senior Laboratory Assistant (SLA). A subset of samples had identifications checked by a second SLA for quality assurance.
QA/QC: 
All field staff have taken a fish identification course for California freshwater and anadromous fishes. The field lead always checks fish identification if in question. Staff hold annual field training days to check each-other's techniques. All data sheets are checked for completeness before leaving a site.

Invertebrate sample sorting will be double-checked to ensure all invertebrates are extracted from detritus. One in five samples will be checked for identification accuracy in house, by qualified laboratory personnel in what is called an "internal" identification check. One in twenty samples will be sent to another laboratory for an "external" identification check. New staff members will have additional quality checks until their identification skills have been verified.

All instruments will have periodic calibrations and maintenance as per manufacturer's instructions. 

When transcribing data, one staff member enters the data from the data sheets to the main database as soon as possible after collection, but no more than one week after collection. After data entry, a second staff member checks the data entry for accuracy and corrects any mistakes. Data are then plotted to check for outliers that may indicate mistakes in data collection, transcription, or instrument calibration. Outliers are dealt with on a case-by-case basis.

Methods references: 
IEP Tidal Wetland Monitoring Project Work Team (PWT). 2017. Tidal wetland monitoring framework for the upper San Francisco Estuary: Standard Operating Procedures. https://www.water.ca.gov/-/media/DWR-Website/Web-Pages/Programs/Environmental-Services/Interagency-Ecological-Program/Files/Standard-Operating-Procedures.pdf?la=en&hash=0692951CEC5D0C897C53120475421A79C7ED648D.

Donley Marineau, E., M. J. Perryman, J. Hernandez, and S. Lawler. 2017. Are there non-target impacts of invasive water hyacinth management for aquatic invertebrate communities in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta? Ch. 3 in Aquatic Invertebrate Dynamics in Two Systems of Concervation Concern. University of California, Davis, Davis, CA.

Hennessy, A. 2009. Zooplankton Meta Data. IEP Bay-Delta Monitoring and Analysis Section, Department of Water Resources, Sacramento, CA. 

Howe, E. R., C. A. Simenstad, J. D. Toft, J. R. Cordell, and S. M. Bollens. 2014. Macroinvertebrate prey availability and fish diet selectivity in relation to environmental variables in natural and restoring North San Francisco Bay tidal marsh channels. San Francisco Estuary and Watershed Science 12(1). http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/0p01q99s.

Simenstad, C. A., and J. R. Cordell. 2000. Ecological assessment criteria for restoring anadromous salmonid habitat in Pacific Northwest estuaries. Ecological Engineering 15(3-4):283-302. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925857400000823.

Wells, E. 2015. IEP Environmental Monitoring Program Benthos Metadata. C. D. o. W. Resources, editor. Division of Environmental Services, Bay-Delta Monitoring and Analysis Section, West Sacramento, CA. http://www.water.ca.gov/bdma/meta/benthic.cfm.
